Introduction to DevOps




         Image Source: https://cloudsmartz.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/Devops-Team.jpg




                                     Krishna Kishore Ghanta
                                                            Kellton Tech
Introduction
With rapid growth and fast moving market, releasing a stable and quality product with latest
features will bring more success and customers. Over the years there have been major
improvements in software lifecycle methodologies and practices. One such practice is DevOps
which most of the organizations are adopting for quick and continuous delivery of a product.
With DevOps, industries can reduce the burden of IT operational costs while handling the
product delivery efficiently and rapidly.

What is DevOps and how it provides value to the Business
DevOps is an approach based on lean and agile principles. It is a collaborative implementation
of development and operations team to achieve high productivity in delivery. Unlike traditional
methods where development and IT operations teams work independently, with DevOps
practice, both the teams work closely and automate the process using various tools, which
helps in continuous process of build and test, tracking, monitoring, and deployments. This
further helps in providing good customer experience by addressing their feedback with a quick
turnaround in providing fixes and adding new features, which in turn provides profitable
business returns and happy loyal customers.

According to the survey done by CA1, the chart below shows benefits seen and anticipated from
implementing DevOps.




1
    Reference: https://www.ca.com/content/dam/ca/us/files/white-paper/devops-winning-in-application-economy-2.pdf
How DevOps Works
The following points explain how DevOps practice works:

Collaborative and close communication
Working together as a team improves interaction and
communication between different teams. This helps in working
in a more coordinated way with prompt action to the tasks or
issues, which reduces the turnaround time. The primary goal of
collaborative and close communication is to avoid conflicts and
escalations between the teams. This helps in proper handover
of the tasks at every stage of the SDLC hence it simplifies
overall process in delivery of a product.

Continuous collaborative development
Development is one of the important phases in SDLC. Continuous collaborative development,
simplifies multiple teams working on various technologies and platforms with iterative
requirements and feedback from business analyst, customers and architects. Unlike the
traditional development methods, continuous development is based on user stories,
development tasks are broken into small pieces to achieve continuous integration and testing in
a short span of time. Collaborative development helps in integrating the code frequently for
continuous release of build. Developed and enhanced code is stored in repository managed
using version control system.

Continuous Integration and testing
                                       With continuous development efforts, a new piece of
                                       code should be integrated continuously. Code will be
                                       integrated to shared repository using version control
                                       system. Every time the code is integrated, testing will
                                       be conducted to make sure it is working as per the
                                       functional and nonfunctional requirement, and not
                                       breaking the existing functionality. Continuous testing
                                       will be achieved by automating the test scripts. This
                                       helps in identifying the bugs at early stages to ensure
                                       the quality of particular build and eventually the product.

Continuous release and deployment
Based on the business criticality and the market requirement,
release will be planned ahead. But in few cases build will be
released on adhoc basis to fix critical bugs. With continuous
integration, build will be made available according to the plan
by the developers. Operations team will have the infrastructure
ready for continuous deployment to the required environments.
Continuous release and deployment will be easily achieved by automating the process. Goal of
the continuous release and deployment is to witness the new features as quickly as possible by
the end users.

Continuous monitoring
With continuous release and deployments software undergoes lot of changes, which requires
close monitoring to assess the performance and issues with real time data flow. For continuous
monitoring, operations team uses monitoring tools to raise an alert/ticket in case of any issues
and to frequently generate performance reports. For any issue which needs a fix, it will be
reported to the development team which will go through SDLC continuously until the product is
stabilized.

Customer feedback
Once the product is out, customer feedback will be taken constantly to improve the quality of the
product. Feedback helps to fine-tune the software with new features and fixes. The ultimate goal
of every product release is to meet the customer expectation and satisfy their need.



                                         Development




                Feedback                                               Testing




                           Monitor                           Deploy



                 Continuous Software Development Life Cycle in DevOps
Automation
Automation is the backbone of DevOps strategy. It helps to reduce the manual effort and speed
up the process to release the software continuously. There are various automation tools in the
market which fits at each stage of the SDLC, for version control, build and test, configuration
management, deployment and monitoring. True outcome of the DevOps can be accomplished
through automation.

Advantages of using DevOps
The proven advantages of using DevOps are:
   ●   Builds trust between the development and operations team which brings a change in the
       attitude towards pursuing the tasks.
   ●   Improved value to the customer feedback with quick turnaround.
   ●   Increase in efficiency, quality and reliability with the automation.
   ●   Cost effective and speedy delivery of a product to market.
   ●   Increase in the IT revenue.

Conclusion
In conclusion, DevOps is an approach that improves the collaboration between Development
and Operations teams. Enabling DevOps improves the speed of the delivery according to the
business and customer needs. Especially automation in DevOps improves the productivity,
reliability and allows standardizing the process, which in turn plays a major role in product
delivery for organizations. DevOps continues to be adapted by various organizations such as
Facebook, Netflix, Walmart etc.
